+++
title = "Announcing Quartermaster 0.5 Requirements Workshop and Hack Day: April 3 and 4, 2019"
date = "2019-02-25T08:00:00+01:00"
tags = ["qmstr", "FOSS", "compliance", "workshop", "requirements", "announcement"]
categories = ["qmstr"]
banner = "img/blog/qmstr-workshop-5-title.jpg"
+++

To prepare the development work on the quarterly QMSTR milestone
releases, the team organizes requirements workshops open to the
community. We are currently working on version 0.4, which is expected
to be released in early April. 0.5 will be developed in the second
quarter of 2019. The 0.5 requirements workshop will take place on
April 3 and 4, 2019 at Endocode's office in Berlin, Germany, right
before the [Compliance Tooling
Group](https://github.com/Open-Source-Compliance/Sharing-creates-value)
meeting, [FOSS-NORTH](https://foss-north.se/2019/) and [LLW
2019](https://fsfe.org/activities/ftf/legal-conference.en.html). There
is a limited availability of 20 seats, so please register early by
using the contact form on the web site.

<!--more-->

# QMSTR Requirements Workshops

The goal of the workshop is to collaboratively develop the roadmap for
QMSTR 0.5 together with interested industry and community
contributors. It will serve to collect feedback as well as industry
and community input on functionality needs. We intend the workshop to
be a hands-on, collaborative experience, complementing the ongoing
decentralized development on Github. There will be two parts to the
events, a hands-on hack day on April 3, and the actual requirements
planning that will take place on April 4. A dinner will be organized
for the evening of April 3 for all those who are interested.

## April 3: Hack Day

The intention of the hack day is to give participants a chance to work
with the QMSTR development team, get demonstrations of recent
features, try out writing an analyzer module or walk through details
of setup and deployments, and egnerally to have a good time and get
over the jet lag. If interesting feature ideas arise from it, even
better, they will be broken down in detail on day 2. A
dinner-and-drinks get-together is planned for the evening.

## April 4: Requirements Workshop

April 4 is the day to review current and recently added functionality,
and plan goals for the six development sprints leading to QMSTR
version 0.5. There will be a lot to talk about with the [FASTEN
Project](https://www.fasten-project.eu/) starting and the Linux
Foundation ACT project launching soon. Besides technical discussions
and roadmap planning, the idea is also to identify opportunities to
collaborate and contribute.

## How to register, venue, hotels

To register, please use the contact form and state that you would like
to attend the workshop. You will receive an email with a confirmation
shortly, provided there are stil seats available. Registration is on a
first-come-first-served basis, with a (somewhat flexible) upper limit
of 20 participants. The workshop will take place at [Endocode's Berlin
office](https://endocode.com/about/). The [Park Inn
Alexanderplatz](https://www.parkinn.com/hotel-berlin) or the [Motel
One
Berlin-Mitte](https://www.motel-one.com/en/hotels/berlin/hotel-berlin-mitte/)
are close by, as are many others many other hotels in the
Alexanderplatz area.

Looking forward to drafting the next milestone with you!

Title image: Neville Wootton, ["It's Lantern City here!"](https://www.flickr.com/photos/nevillewootton/33263496771), CC BY 2.0 - thanks for sharing!
